.TH BIBLEDIT-RDWRT 1 "August 18 2011" "Version 4.2"
.SH NAME
.B bibledit-rdwrt \- Read or writes data to or from a Bibledit-Gtk Bible or project
.SH DESCRIPTION
Bibledit-rdwrt can read from or write to Bible data.

Syntax: bibledit-rdwrt -r|-w project book chapter|0 fileName

Breaking the syntax down we have:

First parameter: -r|-w 
This can be either -r or -w which determines whether the remaining arguments are going to do a "read" operation 
from the specified Bibledit-Gtk Bible / project, or do a "write" operation to that Bible / project.

Second parameter: project 
This gives the name of the Bibledit-Gtk Bible / project. 
All we have to do is ensure that the project name we want to access is a valid/existing one.

Third parameter: book
This is simply the 3-letter book code for the Bible book that is being read/written to.
I.e., MAT for Matthew, GEN for Genesis, etc.

Fourth parameter: chapter|0
This can be either a chapter number or 0 (zero) for reading/writing either an individual chapter 
or reading/writing a whole book (when the parameter is 0). 

Fifth parameter: fileName
This is a temporary file name that we assign for our use with bibledit-rdwrt.
For a read (-r) operation this fileName argument is the name of the file that will be created by bibledit-rdwrt
containing a copy of the whole book (corresponding to the 3-letter code), 
or that contains the individual chapter contents (of a designated chapter) of an existing Bibledit-Gtk book file
in the Bible / project. It should be prefixed with a path us. 
Since bibledit-rdwrt is a console operation, after AdaptIt calls it using ::wxExecute, 
it would need to read the resulting temporary file to grab the contents for its use. 
For a write (-w) operation this fileName argument is the name of the temporary file that bibledit-rdwrt reads 
to get the text which it then writes to the appropriate Bible / project file. 
The temporary file can contain the text of a whole book, or just the text of a single chapter 
for the book specified by the book 3-letter code and the chapter (number) argument. 

bibledit-rdwrt may exit with 0 on success, or -1 on failure, as it sees fit.
It may write to stdout or stderr, as it sees fit.
.PP
.SH LICENSE
This program is distributed under the GNU General Public License, as noted in
each source file.
